This is the README file for mtxreusedist, a program for computing
reuse distance and other metrics for data locality in connection with
sparse matrix-vector multiplication kernels.

  Copyright (C) 2023 James D. Trotter

  Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
  are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
  notice and this notice are preserved.

Building
--------

The mtxreusedist program can be built with `make'. Compilation and
linking may be configured through the environment variable `CC', which
is used to choose a compiler, and `CFLAGS' and `LDFLAGS', which are
used to set compiler flags and linker flags, respectively. Here is an
example:

     make CC=gcc CFLAGS="-O3 -march=native"

If support for loading zlib-compressed Matrix Market files is needed,
then compile with -DHAVE_LIBZ and link to zlib:

     make CC=gcc CFLAGS="-O3 -march=native -DHAVE_LIBZ" LDFLAGS="-lz"


Usage
-----

mtxreusedist is used to load a matrix from a file in Matrix Market
format (see https://math.nist.gov/MatrixMarket/formats.html), convert
the sparse matrix to compressed sparse row (CSR) format, and then
compute reuse distance or similar metrics for a sparse matrix-vector
multiplication (SpMV) kernel using the given matrix.

Some parts of these computations can use OpenMP for shared-memory
parallelism. In this case, the environment variable `OMP_NUM_THREADS'
can be set to control the number of threads that are used. In
addition, `OMP_PROC_BIND' can be set to bind threads to particular
cores.

If the option `--verbose' is supplied, then some more information is
printed, such as how long time is spent loading the matrix and
computing the reference distance.

Here is an example showing how to compute reference distance for the
matrix stored in the file test.mtx:

    $ ./mtxreusedist test.mtx
    3
    0
    2
    3
    -1
    -1
    -1
    -1
    -1

The output of the above command consists of one line for every nonzero
of the sparse matrix. The value printed is the reference distance
corresponding to each access to the source/input vector in the SpMV
kernel.

A non-negative value N means that the corresponding source/input
vector value for that nonzero is accessed again N+1 matrix nonzeros
later, whereas a value of -1 means the corresponding source/input
vector value is never reused.

Recall that for rowwise SpMV kernels, such as those based on matrices
in CSR format, the only irregular memory accesses are to the
source/input vector. Accesses to the column indices and matrix
nonzeros are regular and there is no reuse. Thus we are only concerned
with the reuse of the source/input vector.


Copying
-------
mtxreusedist is free software. See the file COPYING for copying
conditions.
